Compatibility guarantees for updating Tarantool (#2752)
tarantool/doc: doc/release/compatibility.rst

Compatibility guarantees
========================

Backwards compatibility is guaranteed between all versions in the same :term:`release series`.
It is also appreciated but not guaranteed between different release series (major number changes).

*   Pre-releases and releases of one release series are compatible in all
    senses defined below (any release with any release).

*   Pre-releases and releases of consequent series are compatible by data

>     layout, binary protocol and replication protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    layout, binary protocol, and replication protocol.
```
Oxford comma

*   No guarantees are given regarding compatibility between
    pre-releases/releases of non-consequent release series if the opposite
    is not stated in the :ref:`release notes <release_notes>`.

*   No guarantees are given regarding compatibility between alpha/beta
    versions and between alpha/beta and pre-release/release even within one series.

Binary data layout
------------------

> A newer release (its runtime) is backward compatible with an older one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any newer release (its runtime) is backward compatible with any older one.
```

> It means a more recent release should work on top of data
> (``*.xlog``, ``*.snap``, ``*.vylog``, ``*.run``) from the older one.
> All functionality of the older release is working in this configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It means the more recent release can work on top of data
(``*.xlog``, ``*.snap``, ``*.vylog``, ``*.run``) from the older one.
All functionality of the older release can work in this configuration.
```

> It should work between :term:`release series` as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same compatibility is maintained between :term:`release series` as well.
```
"should work" reads a bit uncertain, like "works on my machine"

> An attempt to use a new feature results in one of these options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An attempt to use a new feature results in one of the options:
```

    senses defined below (any release with any release).

*   Pre-releases and releases of consequent series are compatible by data
    layout, binary protocol, and replication protocol.

*   No guarantees are given regarding compatibility between
    pre-releases/releases of non-consequent release series if the opposite
    is not stated in the :ref:`release notes <release_notes>`.

*   No guarantees are given regarding compatibility between alpha/beta
    versions and between alpha/beta and pre-release/release even within one series.

..  _cg_data_layout:

Binary data layout
------------------

Any newer release (its runtime) is backward compatible with any older one.
It means the more recent release can work on top of data
(``*.xlog``, ``*.snap``, ``*.vylog``, ``*.run``) from the older one.
All functionality of the older release can work in this configuration.
The same compatibility is maintained between :term:`release series` as well.

An attempt to use a new feature results in one of the options:

*   The attempt is successful.

*   There is a meaningful error about the old data layout until the database schema upgrade.

>     It does not lead to a service outage or data corruption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The error does not lead to service outage or data corruption.
```

>     An instance can upgrade the data layout using the :ref:`box.schema.upgrade() <admin-upgrades>` call
>     to enable all new release features (when all instances of the replicaset are run on the same Tarantool version).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    An instance can upgrade the data layout by calling :ref:`box.schema.upgrade() <admin-upgrades>`,
    which enables all new release features (when all instances of the replicaset run on the same Tarantool version).
```

..  _cg_binary_protocol:

Binary protocol
---------------

The binary protocol evolves without breaking compatibility with old clients.

> All binary protocol requests operational in an older release should work on a newer one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All binary protocol requests operational in an older release should work in a newer one.
```

> They do not change the meaning.

Reviewer: This sentence is unclear and seems redundant. Could we possibly delete it?

Responses have the same format, but mappings may contain fields not present in the older release.

> ``net.box`` client of the older release is able to work
> with the newer one, except the features introduced in the newer release.
> ``net.box`` client of the newer release is fully operational with the server
> running under the older one, except the features not implemented in the older release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A ``net.box`` client of an older release can work
with a server running a newer release. However, ``net.box`` features introduced in the newer release won't work.
A ``net.box`` client of a newer release is fully operational with a server
running an older release. However, only the features implemented in the older release will work.
```
'Newer one'—newer client or

..  _cg_replication_protocol:

Replication protocol
--------------------

> An instance run on a newer release may work as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An instance running on a newer release can work as:
```
"may" = "probably" or "is generously allowed"

*   upstream (master) of an instance with an older release

> *   downstream (replica) without a database schema upgrade.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   downstream (replica) without database schema upgrade.
```

The database schema upgrade (``box.schema.upgrade()``) must be performed when all replicaset instances
run on the same Tarantool version.

> The upgrade does not cause downtime if the application does not lean on internal schema representation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The upgrade does not cause downtime if the application does not lean on internal schema representation.
```
I suggest rephrasing it without double negation ("does not... if does not"). The current phrasing requires leaping through some logic hoops :)

..  _cg_lua_code:

Lua code
--------

> If a code is run on an older release, it will operate with the same effect on a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a code run on an older release, it will operate with the same effect on a
```
"Run" can't be passive

newer one. However, only meaningful code counts.
If any code throws an error but starts doing something useful, the change is considered compatible.

> A room for new functionality is still here: adding new options, more

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is still room for new functionality: adding new options, more
```
idiomatic

> fields to a returning table, and more returning values (multireturn).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fields to a returning table, and more returning values (multireturn).
```
"Returning table" looks like a term here. I haven't seen this term before. What does it mean? Might it be "return table" and "return values"? Please correct me if I'm wrong.

> Adding a new built-in module or a new global value is considered as the compatible change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding a new built-in module or a new global value is considered as a compatible change.
```

> Adding a new field to an existing metatable is okay if it is not listed in the Lua 5.1 Reference Manual. Otherwise, it should be proven that it may not break any meaningful code.

Reviewer: - "It is not listed"—what is "it"? The field or the table?
- Consider adding a link to the Lua reference manual.
- "May not" -> "won't" (see my comment about "may" above")

Author: "It is not listed"  -> the field

Examples of compatible changes:

> *   Add ``__pairs``, ``__ipairs`` to a metatable of a userdata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   Add ``__pairs``, ``__ipairs`` to a metatable of a userdata object.
```
(If I understand it right. Currently, "a data" looks like an error.)

>     It is not from Lua 5.1, and the userdata has no default behaviour for ``pairs()`` and `ipairs()` calls.

Reviewer: "It"—is what? The object, the metatable, or ``pairs()`` (which is... a function? a field?)?

*   Add ``__lt``, ``__le`` metamethod
    (if the attempt to use ``<``, ``<=`` and so on leads to an error before the change).

> Examples of NOT compatible changes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Examples of **incompatible** changes:
```

*   Add ``__pairs``, ``__ipairs`` to a metatable of a table or cdata

>     (it already has its own behavior before the change).

Reviewer: "Its own behavior"—what does it mean? Everything has a behavior.

> *   Add ``__pairs``, ``__ipairs`` to a metatable of a table or cdata
>     (it already has its own behavior before the change).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   Add ``__pairs``, ``__ipairs`` to a metatable of a table or cdata
    (it already has a defined behavior before the change).
```
I think this might work

> *   Add ``__eq`` metamethod (``==`` already returns some result`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   Add the ``__eq`` metamethod (``==`` already returns some result`).
```

..  _cg_sql_code:

SQL code
--------

> If any request is run with the same effect, the change is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If any request is processed with the same effect, the change is
```
The same effect as what? Also, run can't be passive.

compatible (except the requests that always lead to an error).

Examples of compatible changes:

*   Add a new keyword.
*   Add a new type.
*   Add a new built-in function.

> *   Add a new system table that starts from underscore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   Add a new system table that has a name starting with an underscore.
```

*   Add a new collation.
*   Add an implicit or explicit cast rule for a set of operations {X} and a list
    of types [Y] if [operation from {X}]([list of values of [Y] types]) had no
    meaning before the change.

> Technically, those changes may break a working code in case of a name clash,
> but the probability of it is negligible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Technically, those changes may break some working code in case of a name clash,
but the probability of it is negligible.
```

> Examples of NOT compatible changes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Examples of **incompatible** changes:
```

*   Change how data is stored in the database.
*   Change the result of working implicit or explicit cast.
*   Change of a literal type.

..  _cg_c_code:

C code
------

> If a module or a C stored procedure is run on an older release,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a module or a C stored procedure runs on an older release,
```

it will operate with the same effect on a newer one.

It is okay to add a new function or structure to the public C API.

> It must use one of the Tarantool prefixes (``box_``, ``fiber_``, ``luaT_``, ``luaM_`` and so on) or introduce a new one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It must use one of the Tarantool prefixes (``box_``, ``fiber_``, ``luaT_``, ``luaM_`` and so on) or introduce a new one.
```
Do I understand it correctly that the newly added function or structure must _itself_ introduce a new Tarantool prefix if it doesn't use any of the existing Tarantool prefixes?

A symbol from a used library must not be exported directly
because the library may be used in a module by itself, and the clash can lead to problems.
Exception: when the whole public API of the library is exported (as for libcurl).

Do not introduce new functions or structures with the ``lua_`` and ``luaL_`` prefixes.
Those prefixes are for the Lua runtime.

> Use ``luaT_`` for Tarantool specific functions, and ``luaM_`` for general-purpose ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use ``luaT_`` for Tarantool-specific functions, and ``luaM_`` for general-purpose ones.
```

> ..  _compatibility_guarantees:

Reviewer 2: I'm going to update the release policy with the following changes:

<details>
<summary>Patch</summary>

```diff
$ diff -u new-release-policy-v6.md new-release-policy-v7-wip.md
--- new-release-policy-v6.md	2022-03-05 16:31:16.197584906 +0300
+++ new-release-policy-v7-wip.md	2022-03-29 18:04:07.466683496 +0300
@@ -126,16 +126,33 @@
   error, but starts doing something useful, the change is considered
   compatible.
 
-  A room for new functionality is still here: we can add new options, add more
-  fields to a returning table, add more returning values (multireturn).
+  A room for new functionality is still here: we can add new arguments to the
+  end and options (fields in a table argument), add more fields to a returning
+  table, add more returning values (multireturn).
 
   Adding a new built-in module or a new global value is considered as the
   compatible change.
 
-  Adding a new metamethod to an existing metatable is okay if it is not listed
-  in the Lua Reference Manual. Otherwise it should be proven that it may not
-  broke any meaningful code (so, mathematical operations may generally be added
-  as well as `__lt` / `__le`; but not `__eq`).
+  Adding a new field to an existing metatable is okay if it is not listed in the
+  Lua 5.1 Reference Manual. Otherwise it should be proven that it may not broke
+  any meaningful code.
+
+  Examples of what is okay:
+
+  - Add `__pairs`, `__ipairs` to a metatable of a userdata/cdata (because it is
+    not from Lua 5.1 and because userdata/cdata has no default behaviour for
+    `pairs()` and `ipairs()` calls).
+  - Add or extend `__lt`, `__le` metamethod (if the attempt to use `<`, `<=`
+    and so on leads to an error before the change -- had no defined behaviour).
+  - Extend existing `__eq` metamethod implementation for a case, where it leads
+    to en error before the change.
+
+  Examples of NOT compatible changes:
+
+  - Add `__pairs`, `__ipairs` to a metatable of a table (because it already has
+    its own behaviour before the change).
+  - Add `__eq` metamethod if it was not defined (default behaviour is defined
+    for any pair of Lua objects).
 
 * **Backward compatibility (SQL code)**
 
@@ -149,6 +166,10 @@
   - Add a new built-in function.
   - Add a new system table that starts from underscore.
   - Add a new collation.
+  - Add an implicit or explicit cast rule for a set of operations {X} and a list
+    of types [Y] if [operation from {X}]([list of values of [Y] types]) is not
+    implemented before the change (raising an error).
+  - Change order of tuples in `SELECT`'s resultset if `ORDER BY` is not specified.
 
   Technically those changes may break a working code in case of a name clash,
   but the probability of this situation is considered as negligible. (We can
@@ -156,8 +177,7 @@
 
   Examples of NOT compatible changes:
 
-  - Change how data is stored in the database.
-  - Change how type arithmetic works (say, implicit casting rules).
+  - Change result of working implicit or explicit cast.
   - Change of a literal type.
 
 * **Backward compatibility (C code)**
```
</details>

Please, reflect the changes in this document.

Reviewer 2: I see that some changes are fully or partially applied. Please, compare it carefully.
